# ABSTRACT: Using Pinto to audit a stack of distributions

package Pinto::Manual::Audit

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VERSION

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1;

__END__

=pod

=head1 AUDITING DISTRIBUTIONS

Pinto provides tools for curating your own custom repositories of distribution
archives. These tools can be used to gather collections of (versioned)
distributions that work well together or work well in a target environment.
Deciding which distributions go into a stack suggests some kind of review
process.  This process could range from running a few simple tests to
performing a detailed security assessment, depending on your particular goals.
Reviewing a stack of distributions can be quite time consuming, depending on
its size and composition, and the objectives of your review.

This process can be extended into a more formal audit by documenting the
review process and asserting certain properties of your curated stack.  This
stack can then be signed by the auditor and published, along with the audit
documentation, for others to use.  An audit document could be as simple as:

    * This stack forms a self-contained unit and passes all its tests on stock
      Perl versions 5.18.4, 5.16.3 and 5.10.1 (reference to Travis CI test report).

    * This stack also forms a self-contained unit and passes all its tests on
      stock RHEL 6 using the vendor supplied Perl (version 5.10.1 with
      modifications) augmented with the `perl-core` packages.

This opens up the possibility of sharing audited stacks, extending existing
audited stacks, and composing new audited stacks from others.  Of course this
requires you to trust the auditors, the processes that they have used, and the
assertions that they have documented.  OpenPG compatible systems like
L<GnuPG|https://www.gnupg.org/> can help with building and managing this
L<Web of Trust|http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_of_trust>.

=head1 AUDITING SAFELY

If you download a distribution archive from a CPAN mirror, you cannot be
certain that it has not been substituted for a malicious archive via a L<man
in the middle attack|http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Man-in-the-middle_attack>),
without performing some additional checks.  L<PAUSE|pause.perl.org> regularly
generates CHECKSUMS files for each of its registered authors.  These files
contain checksum information for all the distribution archives uploaded by the
author.  In addition, PAUSE clear signs these CHECKSUMS files using the PAUSE
Batch Signing Key (450F89EC).  The upshot is that, if you download the
CHECKSUMS file for the author of your distribution, verify that it has been
signed by PAUSE, and verify that the checksums for the distribution archive
match the checksums in that file, then you can be fairly certain that the
archive you have is the same as the one originally uploaded to PAUSE.  This is
fantastic, because it means that administrators of CPAN mirrors do not need to
purchase and install expensive SSL certificates.  Of course, this requires
users to independently verify the PAUSE Batch Signing Key (450F89EC) and
actually perform the tests described above.  Sadly, this happens less often
than it should.

Pinto has the option C<--verify-upstream>, that can be used with all the
commands that (perhaps indirectly) download packages from CPAN:
L<add|Pinto::Command::add>, L<install|Pinto::Command::install>,
L<pull|Pinto::Command::pull>, and L<update|Pinto::Command::update>. This
triggers the above checksum and signature checks. There is also
L<verify|Pinto::Command:install> that will run those checks over all
distributions in the repository.

This verification process may generate a lot of messages like the following:

    WARNING: This key is not certified with a trusted signature!
    Primary key fingerprint: XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX

To get rid of the message you have to add the key to your default keyring
(after independent verification) and give it 'Ultimate Trust'.  This is not
ideal given the amount of effort required to verify a key to the point where
you are willing to assign such a high level of trust.

An alternative is to maintain and use an dedicated keyring solely for Pinto
verification. Adding the PAUSE Batch Signing Key (450F89EC) and giving it
'Ultimate Trust' is probably fine after verifying this key from a couple of
sources.

If you are using GnuPG, you can use the environment variable PINTO_GNUPGHOME
to instruct pinto to use an alternate keyring/trustdb, e.g,

    # Set up an alternate location for your keyring and trustdb
    mkdir ~/myrepo/gnupg
    chmod 700 ~/myrepo/gnupg
    cp ~/.gnupg/gpg.conf ~/myrepo/gnupg/

    # Download and import the PAUSE Batch Signing Key
    gpg --homedir=~/myrepo/gnupg --recv-keys 450F89EC

    # Edit the PAUSE key to give it ultimate trust
    gpg --homedir=~/myrepo/gnupg -edit 450F89EC

    # Set pinto to use the new keyring and trustdb
    PINTO_GNUPGHOME=~/myrepo/gnupg; export PINTO_GNUPGHOME
    pinto pull Module::Signature
    ...

There is always the possibility that the author has had their PAUSE account
hacked and someone else is uploading malicious archives.  Authors can protext
against this by embedding self-signed SIGNATURE files in their distributions
using C<cpansign|Module::Signature>.  This is problematic because it requires
you to verify the signature of every author -- if you don't, a valid signature
identifying a fake user could be used -- and you may have to verify a lot of
authors.  At the time of writing only 7% of distributions had embedded
signatures, so this kind of verification might not give you much coverage
anyway.

All of the above is good, but it still does not protect against a rouge author
uploading malicious distributions to PAUSE. To cover off this case, and the
one above, you really have to perform a security focused audit.  Running
a security focused audit requires skills, knowledge, supporting environments,
and a degree of paranoia that is outside the scope of this document.

=head1 THE AUDIT PROCESS

While the details of an audit depend on it goals and our audit policy, we can
suggest some general process guidelines:

1. We use a private repository for performing the audit.

    pinto --root ~/private init

2. We avoid distributions that don't verify:

    pinto pull --verify-upstream King::Lear

3. Our default 'master' stack contains the distributions we are
   going to work on, e.g.,

   print --root ~/private list --format "%a/%f" | sort -u

4. We can inspect the distribution with the look command, e.g.,

   print --root ~/private look SHAKESPEARE/King-Lear-1.2.tar.gz

5. Distributions that have been reviewed can be registered with a 'reviewed' stack, e.g.,

   print --root ~/private register --stack 'reviewed' SHAKESPEARE/King-Lear-1.2.tar.gz

6. We can track un-audited distributions with the `diff` command:

   pinto --root ~/private diff master reviewed

7. Distributions that are acceptable with respect to the our documented review policy can
   registered with a 'passed-policy-A' stack.

8. Distributions that are problematic with respect to the policy can be
   registered with a 'failed-policy-A' stack, and details can be recorded in the
   commit comments.

9. We use a separate 'public' repository for publishing our reviewed stacks.
   This repository has our 'private' repository as its only unstream
   repository:

   pinto -root ~/public init --source ~/private

10. Once we have completed our review, we can pull the distributions that
   passed into our public repository:

   pinto --root ~/private list --stack 'passed-policy-A' --format "%a/%f" | \
        sort -u | pinto --root ~/public pull

11. We can then sign our public repository with our PGP key

   pinto -root ~/public sign ABCDEFGH

12. Finally, we can publish our repository alongside a signed document
   describing out review process and its assertions.

=cut
